Add tutorial "Using Stamped datatypes with tf2_ros::MessageFilter" (#1929)
ros2/ros2_documentation: source/Tutorials/Tf2/Using-Stamped_datatypes-with-tf2_ros-MessageFilter.rst

.. _UsingStampedDatatypesWithTf2rosMessageFilter:

Using Stamped datatypes with tf2_ros::MessageFilter
====================================================

**Goal:** Learn how to use tf2_ros::MessageFilter to process Stamped datatypes.

**Tutorial level:** Intermediate

**Time:** 10 minutes

.. contents:: Contents
   :depth: 3
   :local:

Background
----------

This tutorial explains how to use sensor data with tf2. Some real-world examples of sensor data are:

    * cameras, both mono and stereo
    * laser scans

> Suppose that a new turtle named ``turtle3`` is created and it doesn't have good odometry, but there is an overhead camera tracking its position and publishing it as a `PointStamped <https://wiki.ros.org/PointStamped>`_ message in relation to the ``world`` frame.

Reviewer: As a general comment, we should not have links out to https://wiki.ros.org .  That is the wiki for ROS 1, and will only be for ROS 1.  Anything for ROS 2 should be on https://docs.ros.org .

That said, we don't have API documentation currently being generated for the `.msg` files in Rolling (as @kurshakuz pointed out).  So let's just not put these links in for now, and we can always add them later on when we get message documentation.

``Turtle1`` wants to know where ``turtle3`` is compared to itself.

To do this ``turtle1`` must listen to the topic where ``turtle3``'s pose is being published wait until transforms into the desired frame are ready, and then do it's operations. To make this easier the `MessageFilter <https://wiki.ros.org/MessageFilter>`_ class of ``tf2_ros`` in  is very useful. 
The tf2_ros::MessageFilter will take a subscription to any ros Message with a Header and cache it until it is possible to transform it into the target frame.

Setting the example
--------------------

1 Write the broadcaster node of PointStamped messages
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> For this tutorial we will set up a demo application which has a node(in Python) to broadcast the ``PointStamped`` messages of ``turtle3``.

Reviewer 2: I think we can add a space before the bracket

First, let's create the source file.

> Go to the ``learning_tf2_py`` package we created in the previous tutorial.

Reviewer 2: May be add a link here?

Inside the ``src/learning_tf2_py/learning_tf2_py`` directory download the example sensor message broadcaster code by entering the following command:

.. tabs::

    .. group-tab:: Linux

        .. code-block:: console

>             wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/ros/geometry_tutorials/ros2/turtle_tf2_py/turtle_tf2_py/turtle_tf2_message_broadcaster.py

Reviewer 2: This file does not exist in the https://github.com/ros/geometry_tutorials yet. Do mind to open a PR to add that file there?

    .. group-tab:: macOS

        .. code-block:: console

            wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/ros/geometry_tutorials/ros2/turtle_tf2_py/turtle_tf2_py/turtle_tf2_message_broadcaster.py

    .. group-tab:: Windows

        In a Windows command line prompt:

        .. code-block:: console

                curl -sk https://raw.githubusercontent.com/ros/geometry_tutorials/ros2/turtle_tf2_py/turtle_tf2_py/turtle_tf2_message_broadcaster.py -o turtle_tf2_message_broadcaster.py

        Or in powershell:

        .. code-block:: console

                curl https://raw.githubusercontent.com/ros/geometry_tutorials/ros2/turtle_tf2_py/turtle_tf2_py/turtle_tf2_message_broadcaster.py -o turtle_tf2_message_broadcaster.py

Open the file using your preferred text editor.

> .. code-block::python

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
.. code-block:: python

```

it is needed to add this space as the code did not appear in the built html page without it

   import rclpy
   from rclpy.node import Node
   from rclpy.duration import Duration

   from geometry_msgs.msg import PointStamped, Point
   from geometry_msgs.msg import Twist
   from turtlesim.msg import Pose
   from turtlesim.srv import Spawn
   
   
   class PointPublisher(Node):

       def __init__(self):
           super().__init__('turtle_tf2_msg_broadcaster')
        
           self.client = self.create_client(Spawn, 'spawn')
           while not self.client.wait_for_service(timeout_sec=1.0):
               self.get_logger().info('service not available, waiting again...')
           request = Spawn.Request()
           request.name = 'turtle3'
           request.x = float(4)
           request.y = float(2)
           request.theta = float(0)
           self.client.call_async(request)
        
           self.vel_pub = self.create_publisher(Twist, "/turtle3/cmd_vel",1) 
           self.sub = self.create_subscription(Pose, "/turtle3/pose",self.handle_turtle_pose, 1) 
           self.sub
           self.pub = self.create_publisher(PointStamped, "/turtle3/turtle_point_stamped", 1)
        
       def handle_turtle_pose(self,msg):
           vel_msg = Twist()

>            vel_msg.linear.x =1.0

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
           vel_msg.linear.x = 1.0

```

           vel_msg.angular.z = 1.0
           self.vel_pub.publish(vel_msg) 
           
           ps = PointStamped()
           ps.header.stamp = self.get_clock().now().to_msg()
           ps.header.frame_id = 'world'
           ps.point.x = msg.x
           ps.point.y = msg.y
           ps.point.z = 0.0
           self.pub.publish(ps)
    
 
   def main():
       rclpy.init()
       node = PointPublisher()     
       try:
           rclpy.spin(node)
       except KeyboardInterrupt:
           pass  
       rclpy.shutdown()

1.1 Examine the code
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> Now, let's take a look at the code.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now let's take a look at the code.

```

> Firstly, we spawn the ``turtle3`` by asynchronously calling the ``Spawn`` service of ``turtlesim``, and initialize its position in (4, 2, 0).

Reviewer 2: I think the correct preposition here would be: at (4, 2, 0).

Afterward, the node publishes the topic ``turtle3/cmd_vel`` and topic ``turtle3/turtle_point_stamped``, and subscribes to topic ``turtle3/pose`` and runs callback function ``handle_turtle_pose`` on every incoming message.

.. code-block:: python

    self.vel_pub = self.create_publisher(Twist, "/turtle3/cmd_vel",1) 
    self.sub = self.create_subscription(Pose, "/turtle3/pose",self.handle_turtle_pose, 1) 
    self.sub
    self.pub = self.create_publisher(PointStamped, "/turtle3/turtle_point_stamped", 1)

Finally, in the callback function ``handle_turtle_pose``, we initialize the ``Twist`` messages of ``turtle3`` and publish them, which will make the ``turtle3`` moving along a circle, then we fill up the ``PointStamped`` messages of ``turtle3`` with incoming ``Pose`` messages of itself and publish it.

.. code-block:: python

    vel_msg = Twist()
    vel_msg.linear.x =1.0
    vel_msg.angular.z = 1.0
    self.vel_pub.publish(vel_msg) 
    
    ps = PointStamped()
    ps.header.stamp = self.get_clock().now().to_msg()
    ps.header.frame_id = 'world'
    ps.point.x = msg.x
    ps.point.y = msg.y
    ps.point.z = 0.0
    self.pub.publish(ps)

1.2 Write the launch file

> ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

```

In order to run this demo, we need to create a launch file ``turtle_tf2_sensor_message.launch.py`` in the ``launch`` subdirectory of package ``learning_tf2_py``:

.. code-block:: python

>     from launch import Laun~~chDescription

Reviewer 2: looks like a typo here

    def generate_launch_description():
        return LaunchDescription([
            DeclareLaunchArgument(
                'target_frame', default_value='turtle1',
                description='Target frame name.'
            ),
            Node(
                package='turtlesim',
                executable='turtlesim_node',
                name='sim',
                output='screen'
            ),
            Node(
                package='learning_tf2_py',
                executable='turtle_tf2_broadcaster',
                name='broadcaster1',
                parameters=[
                    {'turtlename': 'turtle1'}
                ]
            ),
            Node(
                package='learning_tf2_py',
                executable='turtle_tf2_broadcaster',
                name='broadcaster2',
                parameters=[
                    {'turtlename': 'turtle3'}
                ]
            ),         
            Node(
                package='learning_tf2_py',
                executable='turtle_tf2_message_broadcaster',
                name='message_broadcaster',
            ),
        ])

1.3 Add an entry point and build the pakcage

> ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

```

       try
       {
         tf2_buffer_->transform(*point_ptr, point_out, target_frame_);
         RCLCPP_INFO(this->get_logger(), "point of turtle 3 in frame of turtle 1 Position(x:%f y:%f z:%f)\n", 
             point_out.point.x,
             point_out.point.y,
             point_out.point.z);
       }catch(tf2::TransformException &ex)
       {
         RCLCPP_WARN(this->get_logger(), "Failure %s\n", ex.what()); //Print exception which was caught
       }    
     }
     std::string target_frame_;
     std::shared_ptr<tf2_ros::Buffer> tf2_buffer_;
     std::shared_ptr<tf2_ros::TransformListener> tf2_listener_;  
     message_filters::Subscriber<geometry_msgs::msg::PointStamped> point_sub_;
     std::shared_ptr<tf2_ros::MessageFilter<geometry_msgs::msg::PointStamped>> tf2_filter_;
   };

   int main(int argc, char * argv[])
   {
     rclcpp::init(argc, argv);
     rclcpp::spin(std::make_shared<PoseDrawer>());
     rclcpp::shutdown();
     return 0;
   }

You can download this code directly from file ``turtle_tf2_message_filter.cpp`` in the ``src`` subdirectory of the ``learning_tf2_cpp`` package.

2.1 Examine the code
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> Firstly, the includes. You must include the tf2_ros::MessageFilter headers from the tf2_ros package. As well as the previously used tf2 and ros2 related headers.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Firstly, you must include the ``tf2_ros::MessageFilter`` headers from the ``tf2_ros`` package. As well as the previously used ``tf2`` and ``ros2`` related headers.

```

.. code-block:: C++

   #include <rclcpp/rclcpp.hpp>
   #include <geometry_msgs/msg/point_stamped.hpp>
   
   #include <tf2_ros/transform_listener.h>
   #include <tf2_ros/message_filter.h>
   #include <tf2_ros/buffer.h>
   #include <tf2_ros/create_timer_ros.h>
   #include <tf2_geometry_msgs/tf2_geometry_msgs.h>
   #include <message_filters/subscriber.h>
   

> Secondly, the persistent data. There need to be persistent instances of tf2_ros::Buffer, tf2_ros::TransformListener and tf2_ros::MessageFilter.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Secondly, the persistent data. There need to be persistent instances of ``tf2_ros::Buffer``, ``tf2_ros::TransformListener`` and ``tf2_ros::MessageFilter``.

```

.. code-block:: C++

   std::string target_frame_;
   std::shared_ptr<tf2_ros::Buffer> tf2_buffer_;
   std::shared_ptr<tf2_ros::TransformListener> tf2_listener_;  
   message_filters::Subscriber<geometry_msgs::msg::PointStamped> point_sub_;
   std::shared_ptr<tf2_ros::MessageFilter<geometry_msgs::msg::PointStamped>> tf2_filter_;

> Thirdly, the constructor. When starting up the ros message_filters::Subscriber must be initialized with the topic. And the tf2_ros::MessageFilter must be initialized with that Subscriber object. The other arguments of note in the MessageFilter constructor are the target_frame and callback function. The target frame is the frame into which it will make sure canTransform will succeed. And the callback function is the function which will be called when the data is ready.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Thirdly, the constructor. When starting up the ROS 2 ``message_filters::Subscriber`` must be initialized with the topic. And the ``tf2_ros::MessageFilter`` must be initialized with that ``Subscriber`` object. The other arguments of note in the ``MessageFilter`` constructor are the ``target_frame`` and callback function. The target frame is the frame into which it will make sure ``canTransform`` will succeed. And the callback function is the function which will be called when the data is ready.

```

   PoseDrawer()
   : Node("turtle_tf2_pose_drawer")
   {
     auto node = rclcpp::Node::make_shared("tf2_ros_message_filter");
     auto create_timer_interface = std::make_shared<tf2_ros::CreateTimerROS>(
       node->get_node_base_interface(),
       node->get_node_timers_interface());  
     typedef std::chrono::duration<int> seconds_type;
     seconds_type buffer_timeout(1);
       
     // Declare and acquire `target_frame` parameter
     this->declare_parameter<std::string>("target_frame", "turtle1");
     this->get_parameter("target_frame", target_frame_);

     rclcpp::Clock::SharedPtr clock = std::make_shared<rclcpp::Clock>(RCL_SYSTEM_TIME);
     tf2_buffer_ = std::make_shared<tf2_ros::Buffer>(node->get_clock());
     tf2_buffer_->setCreateTimerInterface(create_timer_interface);
     tf2_listener_ =
       std::make_shared<tf2_ros::TransformListener>(*tf2_buffer_);
     point_sub_.subscribe(this, "/turtle3/turtle_point_stamped");
     tf2_filter_ = std::make_shared<tf2_ros::MessageFilter<geometry_msgs::msg::PointStamped>>(point_sub_, *tf2_buffer_, target_frame_, 10, node, buffer_timeout); 
     tf2_filter_->registerCallback(&PoseDrawer::msgCallback, this);
   }  

> And lastly, the callback method. Once the data is ready, just call tf2_buffer_->transform and print to screen for the tutorial.

Reviewer 2: It is always best to wrap code snippets. It is better for visibility and for the complication. For example, this code snippet created a link in the text that is not getting anywhere.

.. code-block:: C++

   //  Callback to register with tf2_ros::MessageFilter to be called when transforms are available
   private:
     void msgCallback(const geometry_msgs::msg::PointStamped::SharedPtr point_ptr)
     {
       geometry_msgs::msg::PointStamped point_out;
       try
       {
         tf2_buffer_->transform(*point_ptr, point_out, target_frame_);
         RCLCPP_INFO(this->get_logger(), "point of turtle 3 in frame of turtle 1 Position(x:%f y:%f z:%f)\n", 
             point_out.point.x,
             point_out.point.y,
             point_out.point.z);
       }catch(tf2::TransformException &ex)
       {
         RCLCPP_WARN(this->get_logger(), "Failure %s\n", ex.what()); //Print exception which was caught
       }    
     }

2.2 Build the package
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> Before rebuild the package ``learning_tf2_cpp``, please add two another dependencies in the ``package.xml`` file of this package:

Reviewer 2: maybe change rebuild to building ?

.. code-block:: console

   find_package(tf2_geometry_msgs REQUIRED)
   find_package(message_filters REQUIRED)

After that, add the executable and name it ``turtle_tf2_message_filter``, which you'll use later with ``ros2 run``.

.. code-block:: console

   add_executable(turtle_tf2_message_filter src/turtle_tf2_message_filter.cpp)
   ament_target_dependencies(      
      geometry_msgs
      rclcpp
      tf2
      tf2_ros
      tf2_geometry_msgs
      message_filters
   )

Finally, add the ``install(TARGETS…)`` section so ``ros2 run`` can find your executable:

.. code-block:: console

   install(TARGETS
      turtle_tf2_message_filter
      DESTINATION lib/${PROJECT_NAME})

Now open a new terminal, navigate to the root of your workspace, and rebuild the package with command:

.. tabs::

   .. group-tab:: Linux

      .. code-block:: console

         colcon build --packages-select learning_tf2_cpp

   .. group-tab:: macOS

      .. code-block:: console

         colcon build --packages-select learning_tf2_cpp

   .. group-tab:: Windows

      .. code-block:: console

         colcon build --merge-install --packages-select learning_tf2_cpp

         

Running and results

> --------------------

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
-------------------

```

First we need to run several nodes (including the broadcaster node of PointStamped messages) by launching the launch file ``turtle_tf2_sensor_message.launch.py``:

.. code-block:: console

   ros2 launch learning_tf2_py turtle_tf2_sensor_message.launch.py

> This will bring up the ``turtlesim`` window, where have two turtles, ``turtle3`` is moving along a circle, while ``turtle1`` isn't moving at first. But you can run the ``turtle_teleop_key`` node in another terminal to drive ``turtle1`` to move:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This will bring up the ``turtlesim`` window with two turtles, where ``turtle3`` is moving along a circle, while ``turtle1`` isn't moving at first. But you can run the ``turtle_teleop_key`` node in another terminal to drive ``turtle1``:

```
